Oh. Good morning.
Are you there, Nick?
Are you there, Nick? Having a lot of sounds is .
Yeah. Nick, are you there?
I think he turned his camera off.
Hey, Nick, could you
turn your camera on? Apparently, that's the instruction.
Oh, good. How we going? Good morning.
I'm getting there. Yeah. No, can you hear me okay now?
Yeah, we can. We've got
10 minutes with you.
Okay. Thank you very much. Good morning, and thank you for this opportunity to
speak. I'm Nick Smaill, and I'm making this submission on behalf of the
West Auckland Licensing Trust Action Group, or WALTAG as we're sometimes
called.
We are advocates for competition. We are a group of community members.
We have a wide range of political perspectives.
But we're united in the view that the licensing trust monopoly in West Auckland
does more harm than good.
We have previously attempted a petition, which unfortunately fell agonizingly short
of the required number of signatures, and some of us have also participated in
recent licensing trust elections under a WALTAG banner.
I understand our submission has been read, and so I'll only speak briefly, and I
would welcome questions and comments from the committee.
Right. Very good. Well, your timing is r-
Are you there? You finished?
No, no, still going.
Oh, sorry.
Yep.
But I will be brief. So our submission poses a
simple question: Are licensing trusts expected to be neutral in their own
democracy?
And we've provided some examples in the written submission, which I won't repeat
today. And the purpose in providing those is not to accuse the West Auckland
Trusts or anyone of wrongdoing. And actually the crux of our submission is
that their actions are probably lawful.
And the question we're posing is whether that's right and whether that's what
Parliament intended.
And this
submission really comes off the back of two things, and the first was
correspondence with the Office of the Auditor-General.
I wrote to them about the trust using public money for market research and PR
advice, which had a specific objective to identify key arguments
to combat the WALTAG campaign.
And that was alongside an apparent allocation of a fighting fund to meet the
challenge from WALTAG head-on.
Now, the Auditor-General took a look at those and said that, A, they
don't enforce the Electoral Act, the Local Electoral Act, and B,
any restricting of trust spending would be a policy matter and not one for
their office. So basically, the message back from the Auditor-General was that
there was nothing to see there. And the second was a recent Ombudsman
investigation, which ended up examining whether there was public interest
in disclosing pro-monopoly advocacy by the trusts.
And that came down to whether they thought that that advocacy was in any way
improper.
And in the end, after a convoluted discussion, the Ombudsman took the
view that even if their activity had electoral consequences,
that it was not improper, so long as their motive was to benefit their
commercial position. So it didn't matter that the mechanism was to influence
voters, so long as the motive was a commercial one.
And so that's what brings me to today's submission.
I see things which strike me as inappropriate for a democratically controlled
public body, but when I've raised these with the relevant authorities, they say
they're okay.
And in fact, in many cases, the public won't even get to see what they're up to.
And so thus, I come back to that question: Did Parliament intend that licensing
trusts would be some kind of special kind of democracy, where the trust
itself needn't stay neutral, but instead can campaign in support of
continuing their monopoly? It's not what I'd choose, but I don't get to set the
rules, and I'm very interested to hear what you think or to get some questions.
So thank you.
Right. I've got Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Thanks, Nick. And thanks for your submission actually bringing this issue to our
attention, the committee's attention, because I think it does actually
kind of highlight a bit of an unusual situation, right?
Where,
again, you're probably pretty clear on Act's views on licensing
trust monopolies. But putting that aside,
even if you say that these trusts are doing a good thing, they're obviously running
a commercial or, yeah, running an alcohol business basically in their area.
But then you've got the requirement for them to obviously then get elected
members.
And so it does seem slightly odd that they, yeah, they can then obviously
use funds from that commercial operation to do some of
the things that you've highlighted here.
Just around the kind of research they were doing into views and
attitudes, can you just talk a bit more about that and what that kind
of showed?
Yeah. So, I mean-
And how they used it, I suppose. Yeah
... they've done-- Yep. So they generally do annual research.
And
shortly after we formed in 2018, I think,
they put in some questions around the arguments that we were
making,
and asked had people signed our petition.
They
took some statements from our website verbatim and tested whether people
agreed with those or not,
and tested arguments in
response to those to say, which ones resonated with the public
to then inform their
communications activities. So we found out about
that in 2021 through, or 2022, I think, around about then
anyway, through an eventual Logoima release.
And there was a little bit of publicity around that, and they've actually toned
that down a bit
in recent years, and I think the questions they're asking now are a little bit
less
on the nose.
But even just recently, I think we've seen in
their research that they've just
let a little bit of it out. They're still asking the public whether they've heard
of the West Auckland Licensing Trust Action Group in their research and it's
a strange question for a local authority to be asking about
one specific ticket.
But that's an interesting comment you just made there, in that you said the local
authority. Are they a local authority?
They're not a TLA as such, are they?
They are. Under most legislation, they are.
So under the Local Electoral Act, they are local authorities.
Members' Interest Act, they are. Local Government, they are.
But they're not under the Local Government Act.
So they're not covered by the Local Government Act.
They are-
And tell me,
there's others around the country like Southland, I think.
Southland, yes.
Are they all-- Just Invercargill. Sorry, Invercargill.
Do they have their own bespoke legislation or are they-
No. So they're all governed by the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act.
There are four left with their monopoly rights, so
Invercargill and Mataura down south, and Portage and Waitaki out
west. All of the ones, there's, I think, maybe another 12 or so
that don't have monopoly rights.
Mm-hmm.
They're still all governed by that same sale and supply of alcohol legislation.
Yeah.
We obviously contemplated, but I suspect as slightly
outside the jurisdiction of the bill we're considering.
But, um-
Well, it's an inquiry, so not-
But-
It's all okay
... because
how it works and what framework it's operating is a pretty important thing, I
think. But anyway, any other questions, members?
No. Fascinating conversation.
Can I just make one quick comment there, Andrew-
Yeah
... on your comment about-
... scope. So,
I think when we look at councils, a lot of that sort of neutrality stuff
is bundled up in the proper purpose and around the purpose of local government.
So if it was to be addressed through that way, then it would go to sale and
supply of alcohol. But it could equally be addressed in the Local
Electoral Act. So
But again, do they have their own bespoke legislation, or
what's the
framework that sets out-
We should just ask
Yeah.
So in the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act, sections about 300 to about
380 or so have-
Okay
... all the information about licensing and community trusts, and that sort of is
their fundamentals.
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning and joining us.
Been a very interesting discussion.
Thank you very much, Andrew.
Cool. Right. Now, we've got Local Government
Professionals
Aotearoa
by Zoom.
Joined by Mr. Paulo Garcia.
Right. Good morning.
I see there's a couple of you this morning. Right. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you.
Looking forward to hearing from you.
Sunny there.
Just checking you can hear me.
Yes, we can.
I'm Monique Davidson. Thank you for your time
this
morning. I'm Monique Davidson, Chief Executive at Hauraki
District Council, but here in my capacity as Vice President
for Tai Tokerau, which is the Local Government Professionals
network for Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Firstly, apologies from Jo Miller, our president.
She's tied up in a council meeting this morning,
so you have me instead. But I am joined here this
morning by
Dean Efford, who's Group Manager, Infrastructure and Services
for Marlborough District Council.
But he chairs the Tai Tokerau Electoral Reference Group.
And we're also joined by Michael Morris, Manager, Governance and Legal
at Invercargill City Council, and no doubt was listening with interest to that most
recent conversation. And he is Deputy Chair of the Tai Tokerau
Electoral Reference Group. And I'm sure many of you know the infamous Raymond
Horan, who is our Chief Advisor here at Tai Tokerau.
Look, I'll just make some very brief comments, but then leave time for you to
hopefully ask the team some questions.
Our central submission as Tai Tokerau is that
the New Zealand's local electoral system cannot continue
in its current trajectory. Declining postal volumes mean
that reliance on postal voting is becoming increasingly costly,
operationally fragile, and logistically complex.
In addition, recent experiences demonstrated that the security and
integrity of postal voting can be compromised.
And we know that that, in turn, affects public confidence
in the electoral process.
At the same time, we consider that online voting is not a viable
option in the foreseeable future.
Persistent security risk and unresolved public trust
means that it cannot yet meet the standards for democratic elections.
And while we absolutely think that those conditions need to be regularly
reassessed, we consider that right now, electoral
reform should focus its energy and attention elsewhere.
But the solution is not just as simple as moving from a postal
vote to an in-person vote, and leaving the rest of the
system unchanged. An in-person vote is a fundamentally
different voter experience. And our submission as Tai
Tokerau is that the whole system
needs to be considered.
Transitioning to it would require careful consideration around
representation arrangements, electoral system design,
the provision of candidate information, and even seemingly
technical matters, such as the order of candidate names on the ballot paper.
And at a time when local government is going through so much government
reform, I think what we need to be mindful of is how the community
understand the electoral process when they're not quite clear what their
representation arrangements might look like under a simplified local government
framework.So for this reason, it's our
submission that electoral reform must include a
redesign of the institutional arrangements that deliver local elections.
We absolutely support the centralization of local
elections functions.
We think a move to in-person voting strengthens this case,
and supports a nationally coordinated approach to things like workforce
development, voter education, and election delivery
standards.
And just very briefly, part two of our submission, therefore
advocates for a whole of system approach to local electoral
reform. New Zealand must consider not only
how people vote, but why they vote, or why
they choose not to vote,
and what structural, procedural, and social barriers
prevent participation. And so in concluding,
I want to note that our strength as Tai Tora lies in
the collective place-based experience that we have as
local government practitioners who have delivered elections in real
communities,
under real conditions, for many, many election cycles.
And it's in that spirit, I encourage the committee
to think about how Tai Tora can assist
in offering assistance as you continue to
explore what the future might look like.
We are happy to answer questions.
Well, thank you.
For 29 recommendations, there's a fair number of them. We've got Mr.
Rosewarn who has got a question for you.
Thank you, Chair. You suggest a six yearly review of online
voting suitability. I'm just wondering why you landed on six years,
and also who should lead that review and how
its findings should be made public.
I'll defer to Raymond to speak to the detail on this one.
While technology's moving quickly, Mr.
Rosewarn,
I think
six years is a bit of a halfway house.
It takes account of the electoral cycle being three.
It allows for
some period of time for technology to develop while not
leaving so much time that,
well, not keeping the review rolling
reasonably frequently.
As to who, I think that needs to be something that's
done
by DIA,
among other things. They are working on
systems for identity management at the moment.
The security agencies, GCSB and ZSIS,
the local government sector and the Ministry of Justice
as keepers of the
central government electoral system.
And the reason I say that is,
if you're looking there, at some point, someone is going to ask why we're not also
looking at its suitability for parliamentary elections.
Right.
Others, are there any other players we think should be involved?
All right.
Through you, Mr. Chairman, just the recommendation from the
GCSB was that
they needed a long lead in time to do the security reviews and investigations,
so they didn't want us to have too short a timeframe between reviews, so that was
part of the reasoning for the six yearly roll as well.
All right. Thank you for explaining that. I've got a question from Honorable Dr.
Duncan Webb.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My question's a more
broad question.
There does seem to be a degree of
dissatisfaction with local government and elected
representatives,
and I guess I'm interested in whether you track,
essentially trust or confidence in local government
and whether the
lack of enthusiasm for voting, and a lack of
trust in how the voting system works has any bearing on
that.
Thank you for the question.
I'd encourage the committee
to dig deep at a place-based level,
to think about in your community the things that you touch and feel and
see every day that is adding value
through the incredible work that local government does.
I think we all accept
that there is a challenge around trust and confidence
of government, and that that is about local and central government
because that's about the services and the
experience all New Zealanders have, and I don't know
if our communities necessarily make a distinction every day between
what local government delivers and what central government delivers.
I know that every council
is required
to be tracking
satisfaction, voice of our ratepayer.
And certainly, I know from a Horowhenua District Council perspective, we
absolutely track trust and confidence.
And the net promoter score is often a methodology used across
councils. And I'm not sure if you've heard already from Local Government New
Zealand, but I suspect when you do hear from Local Government New Zealand, one of
the things they could talk about is the reputational survey work
that was done a few years ago,
that
tells a story about
the need for community to better understand what local government
does. And I'm sure you will all agree that
part of the solution to that is about central and local government working
together, to figure out how we can continue to
deliver efficient and effective services to our community at
place through partnership.
All right. And now I've got another question from Celia Wade-Brown.
Completely different area. I'm interested in
having that central
administration for the local elections, and how
you see the cost sharing between central government and local
government if the Electoral Commission were to
actually run the elections. You make a point in your
submission that there's quite a variation between, I think it's your
submission, it might be the background paper.
There's quite a variation in how much different councils
spend per capita. And so how would you make a
fair play there?
Yeah, I think that
it's a really good practical example of how
the financial constraints that councils are operating in,
where we need to consider what unintended consequences of
a rates capping regime might look like, because it could actually limit council's
ability to invest and fund in this stuff well.
I think the opportunity, if there is a centralized system,
is for it to ensure that the small
councils are not
bearing the cost in the same way that larger councils would be.
And surely there are some efficiencies through a centralized
system from both central and local government
electoral systems. And so I don't think we're suggesting local government shouldn't
pay their share.
But I think that there would need to be some sound methodology
to ensure small communities were not
disadvantaged.
All right.
If I could add to that,
we'd also expect to have some representation
around the commission,
to input into the design of things like promotion, to
input into the charging methodologies and so on.
I'd just also add that, I accept the point the
member makes.
One of the key benefits of centralizing things is
that there then would be a degree of consistency and approach
across local authorities as to, for example, what promotion is
done and so on.
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission.
We have heard from local government, so that question before.
But thank you, very helpful discussion this morning
and for your time.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
Right. We're going to go back into private se-